src/pages/2018-02-19-gatsby-static-site/index.md, before:

---
title: Building Static Sites with Gatsby
date: "2018-02-19"
path: "/gatsby-static-sites"
published: false
---

## What is Gatsby?
So I've purchased adampritzl.com and desided to create a website for my self to share what I learn with you.  I've heard static sites are the way to go so I did some searching and found [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.com).

Gatsby is a static site generator built on top of React.  You can bring your own data from various CMSs, markdown, and there is a big list of others.  The data is pulled in using prebuilt [plugins](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/plugins/) and queried using GraphQL.

Since React is my front end framework of choice these days, it was the perfect fit.

## How does Gatsby work?

Since Gatsby is based on React, it uses components to create the website.  There are four major [components](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/building-with-components/) that are used to build a Gatsby site.

* **Html** - This includes the html, head, and body tags
* **Layout** - This is an optional component that wraps page components.  It is used for things like headers, footers, and navigation
* **Page template** - This component is used for programmatically building pages.  For example, turning markdown into html pages.
* **Page** - Components build with these become pages on your site.

## Do I need to know Webpack?

In most cases you will not need to do any webpack configuration.  There are many prebuilt [plugins](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/plugins/) that will do things like SASS processing, or adding TypeScript support.  If you find there is not a pluggin that solves your problem and it is a genral one, why not contribute back to the open source community and create a plugin.

## What are plugins?

Plugins are npm packages you can pull in to your gatsby project to solve website build tasks.  Plugins are load and configured by your gatsby-config.js file.  The three major classes of plugins are source, transform, and build.  Source plugins allow you to pull data from differents sources like a CMS, markdown files, or some API.  Transform plugins allow you to take a format of data like markdown, or JSON, and turn it into html.  Build plugins help you do your webpack type tasks like compiling SASS files.

## What is GraphQL

[GraphQL](http://graphql.org/) is a language for describing APIs of various kinds. In the context of Gatsby, it creates an interface between your data sources and your static site.  For the purpose of building a blog I'm using it to query my markdown files and build my static blog pages.  Gatsby has a fantasic live IDE built in for creating queries.  It can be found as follows.

```html
http://localhost:8000/___graphql
```

## Building a blog

Gatsby has a bunch of great starter projects from both Gatsby and the community.  Today we will take a look at the offical starter, [gatsby-starter-blog](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog).  To get started just type the following.

```powershell
gatsby new blog https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog
```

This will create a directory called blog, clone the github repo and run npm install.  To start up the development server just type `gatsby dev`.

## Deployment & Hosting

There are a bunch of services you can host on such as Amazon S3, Netlify, GitHub Pages, Surge.sh.  I chose [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/).  It's screaming fast, has built in continuous delivery, and free SSL using Let's Encrypt.

## Conclusion

Other use cases, react, fast

Commit message:

More gatsby static sites work

src/pages/2018-02-19-gatsby-static-site/index.md, after:

---
title: Building Static Sites with Gatsby
date: "2018-02-19"
path: "/gatsby-static-sites"
published: true
---

## What is Gatsby?
So I've purchased adampritzl.com and desided to create a website for my self to share what I learn with you.  I've heard static sites are the way to go so I did some searching and found [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.com).

Gatsby is a static site generator built on top of React.  You can bring your own data from various CMSs, markdown, and there is a big list of others.  The data is pulled in using prebuilt [plugins](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/plugins/) and queried using GraphQL.

Since React is my front end framework of choice these days, it was the perfect fit.

## How does Gatsby work?

Since Gatsby is based on React, it uses components to create the website.  There are four major [components](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/building-with-components/) that are used to build a Gatsby site.

* **Html** - This includes the html, head, and body tags
* **Layout** - This is an optional component that wraps page components.  It is used for things like headers, footers, and navigation
* **Page template** - This component is used for programmatically building pages.  For example, turning markdown into html pages.
* **Page** - Components build with these become pages on your site.

## Do I need to know Webpack?

In most cases you will not need to do any webpack configuration.  There are many prebuilt [plugins](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/plugins/) that will do things like SASS processing, or adding TypeScript support.  If you find there is not a pluggin that solves your problem and it is a genral one, why not contribute back to the open source community and create a plugin.

## What are plugins?

Plugins are npm packages you can pull in to your gatsby project to solve website build tasks.  Plugins are loaded and configured by your gatsby-config.js file.  The three major classes of plugins are source, transform, and build.  Source plugins allow you to pull data from differents sources like a CMS, markdown files, or some API.  Transform plugins allow you to take a format of data like markdown, or JSON, and turn it into html.  Build plugins help you do your webpack type tasks like compiling SASS files.

## What is GraphQL

[GraphQL](http://graphql.org/) is a language for describing APIs of various kinds. In the context of Gatsby, it creates an interface between your data sources and your static site.  For the purpose of building a blog I'm using it to query my markdown files and build my static blog pages.  Gatsby has a fantasic live IDE built in for creating queries.  It can be found as follows.

```html
http://localhost:8000/___graphql
```

## Building a blog

Gatsby has a bunch of great starter projects from both Gatsby and the community.  Today we will take a look at the offical starter, [gatsby-starter-blog](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog).  To get started just type the following.

```powershell
gatsby new blog https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog
```

This will create a directory called blog, clone the github repo and run npm install.  To start up the development server just type `gatsby dev`.

Ok now we are ready to start building our site for the blog.  We will need to use some of the pluggins I mentioned before.  

We need to get our blog data from somewhere.  A popular method for publishing blog posts is to create them in markdown.  First we need to get the .md file from disk.  We'll use the source plugin, [gatsby-source-filesystem](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-source-filesystem/), to do this.  This plugin will create a set of File nodes from the directory specified in the config.  You can query these nodes from GraphQL, or use a transformer plugin to convert the file data into another form.

This is where the [gatsby-transformer-remark](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-transformer-remark/) plugin comes in.  It will parse the markdown files into MarkdownRemark nodes.  These nodes can be queried by GraphQL in our page template component and used to build each page using that template.

If you are writing a technical blog you might want to display code in a nice way.  The [gatsby-remark-prismjs](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-remark-prismjs/).  This allows you to wrap your code in markdown language tag and display the propery syntax highlighting.

You also might want to publish and link some files with your blog.   By using [gatsby-remark-copy-linked-files](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-remark-copy-linked-files/) you simply copy your file along side your .md file, link it, and the build process will copy the file the root of the public directory by default.

You'll also have to deal with images while creating your blog.  Using the [gatsby-remark-images](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-remark-images/) plugin will create multiple versions of the image for diffent widths,  wrap your image in a container to prevent content from jumping around, and add a blur up effect where while the image is still loading it will use a blurred version as the place holder.

You are also going to want people to subscribe to your blog don't you? You can use the [gatsby-plugin-feed](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-feed/) to build an rss.xml file using GraphQL that your readers can subscribe to using their favorite RSS feed reader.

## Deployment & Hosting

There are a bunch of services you can host on such as Amazon S3, Netlify, GitHub Pages, Surge.sh.  I chose [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/).  It's screaming fast, has built in continuous delivery, and free SSL using Let's Encrypt.

## Conclusion

As you can see Gatsby + Netlify is a great way to get you blog up and running.  Next I'd like to implement a taging system for orgainization.  GraphQL will be a great way for me to create a tag component.  I'll do that once I get a couple posts under my belt.

Gatsby is a really rich extendable static site generator.  It's not only good for creating blogs but for creating any site rich with content.

* using can use their familier CMS editing tools, wordpress, drupal
* headless CMS like contentful
* Headaches with wordpress?  Migrate using [gatsby-source-wordpress](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-source-wordpress/)
* CSV files that you need to tranform into something useful? [gatsby-transformer-csv](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-transformer-csv/)

## Resources
